The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted many lives, especially those of
students. This proposed project, Sirani, focuses on the mental health and well-being
of the user while aiming to help them effectively manage their mental health. It will
include a personal goal setting feature, sleep and mood tracking, mental health
resources, and a weekly test for self-awareness. As required, this project will be
developed using the programming language C++ along with Qt framework to design
a user-friendly GUI. MySQL will also be used as the database management system.
Sirani intends to make mental health accessible, comfortable, and non-stigmatizing.Although our lives have been drastically altered over the past 2 years, people are
returning to their normal lives following the end of lockdown. The mental health of
people has taken a heavy hit throughout the lockdown and re-adapting back to our
lives is equally challenging. Amidst all this, students have a more difficult time
focusing on their studies, especially with the never-ending fear of another wave of
Corona. The World Health Organization (WHO) has identified mental health as an
integral component in COVID-19 response. [1] Loneliness and substance abuse have
been a common problem among youths and adults alike. “Addressing mental health
and substance use problems in young adults, both during and after the COVID-19
pandemic, is an imperative,” says Viviana Horigian from the University of Miami in
Coral Gables, Florida. [2]
The issue of mental health is not unique to the pandemic but has always been of
prime importance. “There is evidence that self-monitoring, on its own, is a
therapeutic activity via increasing self-awareness”. [3] Hence, A relatively new
approach to mental health is the use of software to monitor mood, stress, coping
strategies, activities, eating, sleeping, and exercise. A trial conducted with 163
participants regarding a mobile type application found out that the data collected from
the application can be reviewed by a doctor which assisted the communication
between the doctor and the patient and helped the doctor understand the patient better.
It was concluded that "Monitoring mental health symptoms appears to increase
emotional self-awareness (ESA) and implementing a mental health program in
primary care and providing frequent reminders, clinical resources, and support to
1
general practitioners (GP) substantially improved mental health outcomes for the
sample as a whole.” [4]
Based on this knowledge, we have developed “Sirani - Your Therapy Buddy”
designed to help users more effectively manage their mental health. It comprises a
multitude of features ranging from mood and sleep tracker to a collection of resources
with an interactive UI designed with Qt framework and C++ to help our users feel
better.
In a world, so demanding, it is not only important to take care of physical health but
also of our mental health. But Nepal being a conservative society, people are not only
hesitant to consult a psychiatrist about their mental health but it is often overlooked
and stigmatized. Depression, Anxiety, Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) are some of the most common
mental health illnesses. In a study conducted among 1647 participants aged 13 years
2
and above in three districts of Nepal in 2019, 13.2% of adults and 11.2% of children
were suffering from some sort of mental disorder. [5]
Hence, we have designed Sirani to help people not just to keep track of their mental
health but also to encourage going to therapy if needed. This is done via a daily mood
and sleep tracker, a weekly test to help the user assess their current mental health
status, and carefully chosen resources to encourage visiting professionals who can
help them for further professional counseling.